Preparing branch for audit (do not merge) (#55)
matter-labs/zksync-airbender: docs/circuit_overview.md

## Airbender Circuit Overview

> This document provides a high level overview of Airbender proving system for RISC‑V execution and then dives into key design patterns and stages. If you just want the big picture, read this section. Later sections explain how each part is implemented and optimized.

Reviewer: Is it an overview of the proof system or just the circuits? I think the former, so the title of the document is misleading

What we prove
  - Deterministic execution of RV32I+M programs over a fixed number of cycles (2^22), in machine mode, with no exceptions (trusted‑code model). Unsupported or invalid behavior makes constraints unsatisfiable.
  - Bytecode lives in ROM. Registers are modeled as a dedicated address space inside a unified memory argument alongside RAM.They occupy a distinct address space (selected by is_register = 1), yet their accesses are encoded using the same RegisterOrRam queries and folded into the global shuffle memory argument.

State and data model
  - Minimal explicit state per row (typically only `pc` split into 16‑bit limbs). All register/memory values flow through a global shuffle RAM argument.
  - Instruction fetches are separate ROM lookups keyed by `pc` (ROM != RAM). Branching/jumps update `pc` deterministically. `x0` is enforced to remain zero.
  - Execution is chunked: each chunk has “lazy init” (initial values/timestamps) and “teardown” (final values/timestamps), linked across chunks to ensure continuity.

Constraints and arguments
  - Generic constraints: arithmetic/logic, control semantics, decoder, range checks, and delegation infrastructure compiled from the CS.

>   - Hardcoded constraints (Stage 3): part that validates Stage 2 arguments (memory, lookups, delegation), boundary conditions, state linkage, ROM separation, lazy‑init sorting with the borrow trick, and per‑domain masking.

Reviewer: We're using "Stage N" before stages are introduced

```702:725:zksync-airbender/cs/src/devices/optimization_context.rs
pub fn append_lookup_relation(...) -> [Variable; N] 
```

```727:753:zksync-airbender/cs/src/devices/optimization_context.rs
pub fn append_lookup_relation_from_linear_terms(...) -> [Variable; N]
```
- Execute all, choose one: we call all instruction handlers to produce candidate diffs, then later select the one that matches the decoded opcode. The optimizer enforces only the active relations. `enforce_all` iterates relation types in a fixed order, and for each index selects inputs via `cs.choose_from_orthogonal_variants(&flags, ...)`. When specialization is possible, it uses a compact form, otherwise it builds masked accumulators and decomposes carries explicitly to stay at degree ≤ 2.
- Early-branch witness assignment to skip heavy computations on inactive branches:

```262:267:zksync-airbender/cs/src/devices/optimization_context.rs
witness_early_branch_if_possible(mask, placer, &evaluate_fn_inner);
```

This pattern yields significant savings:

- Fewer muxes and selectors: selection happens once per relation type, not per wire.
- Variable reuse: preallocated registers/flags/bytes are recycled across operations.

> - Betterfor GPU. Uniform relation shapes are easier to fold in Stage 3.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Better for GPU. Uniform relation shapes are easier to fold in Stage 3.
```

  - Evaluate memory, lookup (including range-check), and delegation arguments on the main domain.
  - LDE these argument columns to the coset domain and commit on both domains.

- Stage 3
  - Evaluate the constraint quotient on the coset domain (zerofier denominators vanish on the main domain).
  - The quotient includes:
    - Generic constraints compiled from the CS (RISC-V op semantics, delegation internals, etc.).
    - A large set of hardcoded constraints (see `prover/src/prover_stages/stage3.rs`) that glue together Stage 2 arguments, enforce boundary conditions, state linkage, lazy init sorting, and other per-domain masks.
  - NTT the quotient to the main domain and commit on both domains.

- Stage 4
  - Sample a random point z in Ext4.
  - Use barycentric evaluation to get evaluations of trace and argument polynomials at z.
  - Construct the DEEP quotient on the main domain from these evaluations.
  - LDE the DEEP quotient to the coset domain and commit on both domains.

- Stage 5
  - Perform FRI folding to build all FRI layers and commit to them.
  - Draw a challenge based on these commitments, combine it with a PoW nonce, and grind to obtain a valid seed for FRI queries.

>   - Draw query points and construct queries.

Reviewer 2: In general, these stages are heavy on specialized knowledge. We can either expand the glossary further or add further info here in-line as it is really the only place where some of these concepts are mentioned
